Reference: Installation directory layout (#162)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/reference/installation-tree-layout.md

The layout for the subdirectories inside each triplet directory is the same:

| Subdirectory                                              | File type                                                       |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| [`bin`](#layout-bin)                                      | Release `.dll` and `.pdb` files                                 |
| [`debug/bin`](#layout-bin)                                | Debug `.dll` and `.pdb` files                                   |
| [`debug/lib`](#layout-lib)                                | Debug `.lib`, `.so`, `.dylib`, and `.a` files                   |
| [`debug/lib/manual-link`](#layout-manual-link)            | Manually-linkable debug `.lib`, `.so`, `.dylib`, and `.a` files |
| [`debug/lib/pkgconfig`](#layout-pkgconfig)                | pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                                         |
| [`include`](#layout-include)                              | Header-files (`.h`, `.hpp`, `.hxx`)                             |

> | [`lib`](#layout-lib)                                      | Release `.lib`, `.so`, and `.a` files                           |

Reviewer: The dynamic mingw triplets use `.dll.a`.

Author: Isn't a `.dll.a` extension just a `.a` extension in the end? 😆

The list is not meant to be all-encompassing, I could add a disclaimer at the beginning, something like:

> Some build-tools may produce files that don't match the conventions described here. Port authors should determine the final location of the produced files based on the purpose each file serves.

Reviewer: Okay, I see. Probably I just enjoy the comfort of seeing the difference between import libs and regular archives ;-)
But ...

Each port must make sure to place manually-linkable files in these directories explicitly.

Files that may cause issues when linked automatically must be placed in the `lib/manual-link`
folders instead of the `lib` directory. For example, if a library is intended to define the
`main()` function for a program. 

### <a name="layout-pkgconfig"></a> `lib/pkgconfig` and `share/pkgconfig` directories

Contains pkgconfig integration files (`.pc`).

### <a name="layout-share"></a> `share/<port>`

Contains miscellaneous files installed by each port, at the very least, each port is required to
provide a `LICENSE` file in `share/<port>` (replace `<port>` with the port name). Some examples of
files contained in this directory are: CMake integration files,
[usage](../maintainers/handling-usage-files.md) files, SPDX files, etc.

### <a name="layout-copyright"></a> `share/<port>/copyright`

vcpkg expects ports to provide a `copyright` file that contains the license information for the
installed package. See the [maintainer
guide](../contributing/maintainer-guide.md#install-copyright-file) for more information.

> ### <a name="layout-cmake"></a> `share/<package>/<package>Config.cmake`, `share/<package>/<package>-config.cmake`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### <a name="layout-cmake"></a> `share/<lower-case-package>/<package>Config.cmake`, `share/<package>/<package>-config.cmake`
```
... if lower-case dirs in vcpkg are preferred, to ensure package config consistently lands in port dir when possible.

(Case would be less relevant if vcpkg would decide to generally put CMake config into `/share/cmake`, ensuring different space for general port data and for cmake config. `<prefix>/share/cmake/<name>*/` is in the search path even before `<prefix>/share/<name>*/`.)

CMake integration files should be placed in the `share` folder and respect CMake's rules for
[`find_package(package)`](<https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/find_package.html#config-mode-search-procedure>)
in `CONFIG` mode.

### <a name="layout-tools"></a> `tools/<port>`

Contains executable tools produced by a port, it is not required, but is highly recommended that
each installed executable goes into a subdirectory matching the name of the port that produced it.
For example, a `contoso` port might install a `ContosoGenerator.exe` to

> `tools/contoso/ContosoGenerator.exe`.

Reviewer: Autotools-based ports install tools to `tools/<port>/bin` and `tools/<port>/debug/bin`, https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg/issues/17607

And I just stumbled over inconsistent handling of "private" tools which ports normally install to `libexec` on non-windows platforms. (I would map this to `manual-tools` in vcpkg.)

| [`debug/lib/manual-link`](#layout-manual-link)                     | Manually-linkable debug `.lib`, `.so`, `.dylib`, and `.a` files |
| [`debug/plugins/<group>`](#layout-plugins)                         | Runtime-load debug `.dll` files                                 |
| [`debug/lib/pkgconfig`](#layout-pkgconfig)                         | pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                                         |
| [`include`](#layout-include)                                       | Header-files (`.h`, `.hpp`, `.hxx`)                             |
| [`lib`](#layout-lib)                                               | Release `.lib`, `.so`, and `.a` files                           |
| [`lib/manual-link`](#layout-manual-link)                           | Manually-linkable release `.dll` and `.pdb` files               |
| [`lib/pkgconfig`](#layout-pkgconfig)                               | Pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                                         |
| [`plugins/<group>`](#layout-plugins)                               | Runtime-load release `.dll` files                               |

> | [`share/<port>`](#layout-share)                                    | Additional configuration-independent files.                     |

Reviewer 2: - `<port>/usage`
- `<cmakepackagename>/vcpkg-cmake-wrapper.cmake`
- `<port>/vcpkg-port-config.cmake`

Contains pkgconfig integration files (`.pc`).

### <a name="layout-plugins"></a> `plugins/<group>` and `debug/plugins/<group>`

Contains shared libraries that are meant to be loaded during runtime by consuming
applications. Libraries in these directories are not automatically linked by any
of vcpkg's integration methods.

### <a name="layout-share"></a> `share/<port>`

Contains miscellaneous files installed by each port, at the very least, each port is required to
provide a `LICENSE` file in `share/<port>` (replace `<port>` with the port name). Some examples of
files contained in this directory are: CMake integration files,
[usage](../maintainers/handling-usage-files.md) files, SPDX files, etc.

### <a name="layout-copyright"></a> `share/<port>/copyright`

vcpkg expects ports to provide a `copyright` file that contains the license information for the
installed package. See the [maintainer
guide](../contributing/maintainer-guide.md#install-copyright-file) for more information.

### <a name="layout-cmake"></a> `share/<lowercase-package>/<package>Config.cmake`, `share/<package>/<package>-config.cmake`

> CMake integration files should be placed in the `share` folder and respect CMake's rules for

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to explicitly comment about:
- The `share/<lowercase-package>/` directory being lowercase.
- The `vcpkg-cmake-fixup` helpers, plus a link.

I think it would also help to provide a brief example like:
```md
For example, if a port expects to provide `find_package(MyPackage REQUIRED)`, it should include
the file `share/mypackage/MyPackageConfig.cmake` or `share/mypackage/MyPackage-config.cmake`.
```

[`find_package(package)`](<https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/find_package.html#config-mode-search-procedure>)
in `CONFIG` mode.

### <a name="layout-tools"></a> `tools/<port>`

> [!IMPORTANT]
> vcpkg is first and foremost a C++ library dependency manager, port authors should
> be deliberate when deciding to include tools in the installation output. For example:
> consider installing only a release executable when the debug tool is not needed.

> Contains executable tools produced by a port, it is not required, but is highly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contains executable tools produced by a port. It is highly recommended, but not required, 
```

---
title: Installation tree layout
description: This article describes the layout conventions used by vcpkg when copying build output into the installation directory.
author: vicroms
ms.author: viromer
ms.date: 9/21/2023

> ---

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ms.topic: reference
---
```
?

Author: Now that Augustin changed the default document type to `reference` we don't need to set it explicitly.

# Installation tree layout

This article describes the layout conventions used by vcpkg for the packages' installation directory. After each
package installation, vcpkg copies the produced output into a specific location depending on the

> file's type.

Reviewer 2: I think this wording is confusing -- "package installation" can easily be interpreted as "moving from packages/ to installed/" or "What happens when I run `vcpkg install`". This paragraph would then imply that we have technology that reorganizes package contents as some sort of "post-vcpkg install" step by analyzing the file type.

In classic mode, the installation directory is located in `$VCPKG_ROOT/installed` (replace
`$VCPKG_ROOT` with your vcpkg installation path). In manifest mode, each manifest file has a
corresponding `vcpkg_installed` directory. Regardless of the operation mode, the layout of the
installation directory remains the same.

The installation directory is created the first time a package is installed, if you don't see a

> installation directory try installing some packages first.

Reviewer 2: This could use more links to other articles, such as the command line reference for the install root.

The root level of the installation directory contains:

> * A `vcpkg` directory, the vcpkg database, keeps track of installed packages and files
> * A directory per each [triplet](../users/triplets.md) that has installed packages, contains the
>   packages build output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A `vcpkg` directory which keeps track of installed packages and files
* A directory for each [triplet](../users/triplets.md) that has installed packages which contains the
  packages' build output
```

## `vcpkg` directory

The vcpkg directory contains two subfolders (`info` and `updates`) and a file named `status`:

### `info` directory

Contains the list of files installed by each port, the naming convention for these files is: 
`<port name>_<version>_<triplet>.list`. The primary purpose of these files is to avoid conflicts
between ports attempting to install files with the same name. The [`vcpkg
owns`](../commands/owns.md) can be used to query the information in these files.

### `status` file

The vcpkg database, this file contains an entry for every package installed for every triplet. This
file is automatically updated by vcpkg and should not be modified manually.

## Triplet directories

The output of each package installation is contained in a triplet-specific directory, for example,
packages installed for the `x64-windows` triplet are located in `installed/x64-windows` directory.

The layout for the subdirectories inside each triplet directory is the same:

| Subdirectory            | File type                                         | 
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |

> | `bin`                   | Release `.dll` and `.pdb` files                   |

Reviewer 2: These should link to the sections below; something like:
```suggestion
| [`bin`](#layout-bin)                   | Release `.dll` and `.pdb` files                   |
```

| `debug/bin`             | Debug `.dll` and `.pdb` files                     |

> | `debug/lib`             | Debug `.lib`, `.so`, and `.a` files               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `debug/lib`             | Debug `.lib`, `.so`, `.dylib`, and `.a` files               |
```

| `debug/lib/manual-link` | Manually-linkable debug `.dll` and `.pdb` files   |
| `debug/lib/pkgconfig`   | pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                           |
| `include`               | Header-files (`.h`, `.hpp`, `.hxx`)               |
| `lib`                   | Release `.lib`, `.so`, and `.a` files             |
| `lib/manual-link`       | Manually-linkable release `.dll` and `.pdb` files |
| `lib/pkgconfig`         | Pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                           |

> | `share/<port>`          | Miscellaneous files.                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `share/<port>`          | Additional configuration-independent files.                              |
| `share/<port>/copyright`          | The license text for the package.                              |
| `share/<cmakepackagename>/<CMakePackageName>Config.cmake`          | CMake integration files for `find_package(CMakePackageName)`.                              |
```

Reviewer 2: (also `<port>/usage` files, `<cmakepackagename>/vcpkg-cmake-wrapper.cmake`, and `<port>/vcpkg-port-config.cmake`)

> | `share/pkconfig`        | pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `share/pkconfig`        | configuration-independent pkgconfig files (`.pc`)                           |
```

| `tools/<port>`          | Executable tools                                  |

> ### `bin` and `debug/bin` directories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### <a name="layout-bin></a> `bin` and `debug/bin` directories
```

On Windows, these directories contain DLL and PDB files for release and debug configuration

> respectively.

Reviewer 2: I would add a note that executables should be moved to `tools/<port>/` and not be placed in the `bin/` directory.

### `lib` and `debug/lib` directories

> Contain object files, any file with the `.lib`, `.so`, and `.a` extensions is placed in these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contains static libraries, import libraries (on Windows), and shared libraries (on non-Windows).
```

configuration-dependent directories.

### `lib/manual-link` and `debug/lib/manual-link` directories

Contain object files that must be manually linked, these directories are configuration dependent.

> Each port must make sure to place manually-linkable files in these directories explicitly.

Reviewer 2: This should expand with a simple example of what qualifies a library as manual link:

```md
For example, if the library is intended to define `main()` for the program, it must be placed in the `lib/manual-link/` directory instead of the `lib/` directory.
```

### `lib/pkgconfig` and `share/pkgconfig` directories

> Contain pkconfig integration files (`.pc`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contain pkgconfig integration files (`.pc`).
```

Link to pkgconfig documentation?

### `share/<port>`

Contains miscellaneous files installed by each port, at the very least, each port is required to
provide a `LICENSE` file in `share/<port>` (replace `<port>` with the port name). Some examples of
files contained in this directory are: CMake integration files,
[usage](../maintainers/handling-usage-files.md) files, SPDX files, etc.

### `tools/<port>`

Contains executable tools produced by a port, it is not required, but is highly recommended that
each installed executable goes into a subdirectory matching the name of the port that produced it.

> For example, the `minizip` ports installs `minizip.exe` to

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to be less concrete here so we can demonstrate better:
```md
For example, a `contoso` port might install `ContosoGenerator.exe` to `tools/contoso/ContosoGenerator.exe`.
```

> `installed/<triplet>/tools/minizip/minizip.exe`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`tools/minizip/minizip.exe`.
```

This section reads to me as assuming an `installed/<triplet>/` prefix, so I'd suggest leaving it implied.
